The promise of paleontology: predictability of species survival at million-year timescales.

Peter D Smits, Seth Finnegan

The promise of paleontology is that by studying the past we can better predict the future. We know that a species with greater than average geographic range is expected to have a greater survival probability than a species with below average geographic range. We also know that a species' geographic ranges changes over time as populations expand and contract across the globe. We are interested in if including a species' most recent change in geographic range improves our survival predictions. If including the past improves prediction at million-year timescales, than the promise of paleontology is rooted in reality. However, if including the past does not improve prediction, than this calls into question the assumption of the promise of paleontology. 

We approached this question by analyzing the fossil record of Cenozoic foramanifera, radiolarians, diatoms, and calcareous nanoplankton as presented in the Neptune database. Using a discrete-time model of species survival we analyzed how survival probability changes over time as a function of species age, time of observation, current geographic range, most recent change in geographic range, global temperature average, and the lag of global temperature. Our best supported model includes the historical covariates, change in geographic range and lag of global temperature, which indicates that the past improves our estimates of the present and future. 

The effects of the historical covariates are extremely small and vary considerably over time. For example, the effect of change in geographic range size can either increase or decrease probability of extinction depending on when in the Cenozoic the observation takes place. This result implies that the effect of change in geographic range on survival most likely stands for many interacting and unobserved processes which in-turn affect survival. 

The improvement in predictive power by including these historical covariates is modest at best and reflects the rarity of extinction events (i.e. class-imbalance) and the extremely stochastic nature of species survival. Correcting for class imbalance, we find that in-sample model performance measures are approximately equal to out-of-sample performance measures as estimated from five-fold time-series cross-validation. These results reflect the difficulty of estimating species extinction, and that while including historical covariates does improve model performance, the difference from a model without historical covariates is very small.

Finally, we find support for species' extinction risk increases with age, though the strength of this effect varies among taxonomic groups. This effect is most pronounced in forams and radiolarians, and less pronounced in diatoms and calcareous nanoplankton. The greatest source of variance in survival probability is the timing of observation. Importantly, this result means that the time of an observation is expected to be a greater source of variation in survival probability compared to species age. 

Ultimately, we find that including information on a species' change in geographic range size on average improves our predictions of species survival at million-year timescales. However, the effect of change in geographic range is much smaller than the effect of current geographic range, and highly variable through time as the effect changes sign and there are times where there is little evidence for any effect of past geographic range. The results of this study reinforce the importance of the promise of paleontology and using the past to predict the future.
